discv5: add intro document, handshake, more theory (#85)
ethereum/devp2p: discv5/discv5-wire.md

Node Discovery Protocol v5 - Wire Protocol
==========================================

**Draft of April 2019**

This document specifies the wire protocol of Node Discovery v5. Note that this
specification is a work in progress and may change incompatibly without prior notice.

UDP Communication
-----------------

> Node discovery messages are sent as UDP datagrams. Since UDP is a lossy transport, packets

Reviewer: I think we do not need to tie the protocol to UDP at this point. This could be rephrased to "Node discovery messages are sent over lossy transports like UDP. Packets may be received..."

may be received in any order or not at all. Implementations should not re-send packets if
the recipient doesn't respond, though there are exceptions to this general rule. If
multiple requests are pending while performing the handshake, the requests may be re-sent
with new keys (see [handshake section]). If a node's liveness has been verified many
times, implementations may consider occasional non-responsiveness permissible and assume
the node is live.

> The maximum size of any packet is 1280 bytes. Implementations should not generate or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To facilitate UDP communication with real-world MTU limits, he maximum size of any packet is 1280 bytes. Implementations should not generate or
```

Author: This will be in the rationale later.

process packets larger than this size. Most messages are smaller than this limit by
definition, the exception being the NODES message. FINDNODE returns up to 16 records, plus
other data, and TOPICQUERY may also distribute a significantly long list of ENRs. As per
specification the maximum size of an ENR is 300 bytes. A NODES message containing all
FINDNODE response records would be at least 4800 bytes, not including additional data such
as the header. To stay below the size limit, NODES responses are sent as multiple messages
and specify the total number of responses in the message.

Since low-latency communication is expected, implementations should place short timeouts
on request/response interactions. Good timeout values are 500ms for a single
request/response and 1s for the handshake.

When responding to a request, the response should be sent to the UDP envelope address of
the request.

> Handshake

Reviewer: Let the awesomeness commence...

---------

Discovery communication is encrypted and authenticated using session keys, established in
the handshake. Since every node participating in the network acts as both client and
server, a handshake can be initiated by either side of communication at any time. In the
following definitions, we assume that node A wishes to communicate with node B, e.g. to
send a FINDNODE query.

> Node A must have a node record for node B and know B's node ID to communicate with it. If

Reviewer: Not directly related, but one thing I mentioned in the rationale somewhere is that we will want to change the AddPeer RPC and the Bootnodes/static nodes lists so that ENRs will be added and not simple IP/port/ID tuples. This is to make it hard to spawn a node with junk data.

> node A has session keys from prior communication, it encrypts its request with those keys.

Reviewer: Text-wise and description-wise this is all really clear and nice. Plus superficially I can't see anything wrong with it technically, and I've been discussing it with you already so I am in the picture. But as a separate exercise I will take this section and have a deeper think about it as a separate kind of technical review, just to give it more attention.

new keys.

**TBD: concurrent handshake tie-breaker rule**

### Notation

`[ .. , .. , .. ]`\
    is recursive encoding as an RLP list\
`rlp_bytes(x)`\
    is the RLP encoding of the byte array `x`\
`a || b`\
    means binary concatenation of `a` and `b`\
`xor(a, b)`\
    means binary XOR of `a` and `b`\
`sha256(x)`\
    is the SHA256 digest of `x`\
`sign(key, x)`\
    creates a signature of `x` using the given key\
`aesgcm_encrypt(key, nonce, pt, ad)`\
    is AES-GCM encryption/authentication with the given `key`, `nonce` and additional\
    authenticated data `ad`. Size of `key` is 16 bytes (AES-128), size of `nonce` 12 bytes.

### Packet Encoding

All packets start with a fixed-size `tag`. For a packet sent by node A to node B:

    tag              = xor(sha256(dest-node-id), src-node-id)
    dest-node-id     = 32-byte node ID of B
    src-node-id      = 32-byte node ID of A

The recipient can recover the sender's ID by performing the same calculation in
reverse.

    src-node-id      = xor(sha256(dest-node-id), tag)

The encoding of the 'random packet', sent if no session keys are available, is:

>     random-packet    = tag || random-data

Reviewer: After this is merged, I should include a document tying these things to some of the rationale. Eg: one consequence of 'tag' here is that the destination id must be known, which addresses some of the initial requirements / vulnerabilities. I think it's better to keep this relationship between the encoding and the requirements separate from this section, as it needs to be clear and concise, but it would be helpful to add it somewhere.
